# UB42

Author: Yikai Cui.

## Definition

**If the quotient a/b is not representable, the behavior of both a/b and a%b (6.5.5).**

a/b 的商不能表示时，a/b 和 a%b 的行为。

## Description

If the quotient `a/b` is representable, the expression `(a/b)*b + a%b` shall equal `a`; otherwise, the behavior of both `a/b` and `a%b` is undefined.

如果商 `a/b` 可以表示，表达式 `(a/b)*b + a%b` 的值应该等于 `a`；否则，`a/b` 和 `a%b` 的行为是未定义的。

## Code

```c title="UB42.c"
#include <stdio.h>
#include <limits.h>

int main() {
    int a = INT_MIN;
    int b = -1;
    printf("%d\n", a);
    int c = a / b;  // Undefined behavior! (1)
    printf("%d", c);
}
```

1. Undefined behavior! The quotient `a/b` is actually `INT_MAX + 1`, which is not representable, whatever value `INT_MIN` is.

[View source](./UB42.c)

## Configurations

=== "MinGW"

    OS: Microsoft Windows 11 22H2

    `gcc -v` : `gcc version 11.2.0 (GCC)`, `x86_64-w64-mingw32`

    compile and run commands: `gcc UB42.c -o UB42.exe && ./UB42.exe`

=== "MSVC"

    OS and cl.exe version: same as `UB21.1.c MSVC`

    compile and run commands: `cl.exe /FeUB21.2 UB21.2.c && ./UB21.2.exe`

## Behaviors

=== "MinGW"

    - Compilation successful.
    - Runtime: program halts (but not terminate) before printing `c`.

=== "MSVC"

    - Compilation successful.
    - Runtime: program terminates before printing `c` with return code 0xC0000095. (It is a special status code in Windows indicating a `STATUS_INTEGER_OVERFLOW` has happened. Refer to the [specifacation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-erref/596a1078-e883-4972-9bbc-49e60bebca55) on Microsoft's website.)

## Advice

Programmer should be quite aware of the possible value of the devision oprands during coding, which is often neglected. For example, if any of the oprand comes from user input, in order to avoid this undefined behavior which would result in unexpected exceptions or infinite loops (like the behavior in MinGW), it is necessary to check and make the assertion of the value before using it.